The Project Gutenberg eBook of "Impromptu", by Grenville Kleiser

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: "Impromptu"
       or How to Think on Your Feet

Author: Grenville Kleiser

Contributor: Isaac Grant Thompson

Release Date: August 23, 2021 [eBook #66125]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Al Haines

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "IMPROMPTU" ***






  "IMPROMPTU"

  OR

  How to Think on Your Feet


  BY
  GRENVILLE KLEISER


  _With an Essay on_
  THE STUDY OF FORENSIC ELOQUENCE
  _By Isaac Grant Thompson_


  _For the Exclusive Use of Grenville Kleiser's
  Mail Course Students_


  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
  NEW YORK AND LONDON
  1910




COPYRIGHT, 1910, BY

FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY

Printed in the United States of America




TO THE STUDENT

I am constantly asked to make suggestions for developing alertness of
mind and facility in formulating one's thoughts while actually
addressing an audience.

I know of nothing more effective for this purpose than daily practise
in impromptu speaking as described in this book.  In hundreds of
instances the results of this simple exercise have been little less
than wonderful, not only in stimulating mental quickness, but also in
developing resourcefulness, concentration, and self-confidence.

The rules for successful impromptu speaking are, tersely, these:

1. Think clearly.

2. Express yourself clearly.

3. Be yourself.

GRENVILLE KLEISER.




  CONTENTS

  "IMPROMPTU"
    List of Subjects

  SPECIMEN ONE-MINUTE SPEECHES
    A Minute
    Lincoln as a Speaker
    Salesmanship
    Providence
    Bismarck
    George Washington
    A Dedication
    Government by the People
    Brevity
    Public Speaking
    Henry Clay
    Woman and Speech
    Boys
    Votes for Women
    Lincoln
    The Value of the Public Speaking Club
        to the Business Man

  THE STUDY OF FORENSIC ELOQUENCE




"IMPROMPTU"




"IMPROMPTU!"

The game of "Impromptu" is the outgrowth of an exercise devised by
the author and used by him in The Public Speaking Club of America.

A number of cards, each bearing a separate subject, are placed in a
hat.  Then a member of the club stands up, selects one of the cards,
announces the subject named on the card, and proceeds to speak on
that particular theme for one minute.  At the expiration of that time
another member rings the bell.

This exercise can be carried on by two or more persons.  It is
surprizing how rapidly through this simple pastime one gains facility
in speech and increased self-confidence.  Many of these "maiden
efforts" at impromptu speaking are necessarily very funny, and
sometimes send the listeners into fits of laughter; but the basis of
the exercise is serious, and there is disclosed new and unsuspected
talent in the participants.

The ability to think and speak "on one's feet" is not usually a gift
of nature, but is acquired through simple and regular practise.
Curran, the distinguished Irish orator, was known in his early days
as "Stuttering Jack."  He has described his first experience in
attempting to speak before a small debating club.  On standing up, he
trembled from head to foot, and when he saw all eyes fixt upon
him--there were seven persons present!--he became almost petrified
with fear.  His friends cried "Hear him!" but altho his lips moved,
not a sound came from them.  He profited by his experience, however,
since through study and practise he became one of the greatest
orators of his day.

"Impromptu" implies ready, offhand, without previous study or
preparation, and provides one of the best tests of a man's fund of
thought and readiness in expression.  In practising "Impromptu" the
student is advised to set his mind rapidly to work the instant he
reads the subject on the card chosen, to content himself with the
first idea that comes to him, and to speak very deliberately.  This
will give the appearance of self-possession, while permitting his
mind to reach out for fresh material.  So rapidly does the mind work
that, after a little practise, the speaker will be able to arrange
his thoughts in a certain sequence, even in the few seconds that
elapse between choosing his subject and uttering the first word.

A conscientious student will endeavor to make each succeeding effort
better than the last.  He will aim to keep strictly to his subject,
to speak fluently, to employ the best possible language, and to
express only those ideas that are worth while.  Where circumstances
render it necessary, one may practise the exercise by himself.

A list of subjects is offered here (which the student may himself
supplement), together with specimen one-minute speeches prepared and
delivered by the author's pupils.  A man who has himself well in hand
and knows precisely what he wants to talk about, can make a most
interesting speech in the short space of one minute.




LIST OF SUBJECTS



   LIST OF SUBJECTS

   LIST I

    1. Automobile, The.
    2. Audiences.
    3. After-dinner Speaking.
    4. Adaptability.
    5. Bachelors.
    6. Battles.
    7. Bores.
    8. Boarding Houses.
    9. Comedy.
   10. Coffee.
   11. Clubs.
   12. Chicago.
   13. Cause and Effect.
   14. College Education.
   15. Conversation.
   16. Disappointment.
   17. Decision.
   18. Deep Breathing.
   19. Debating.
   20. Death.
   21. Dignity.
   22. Etiquette.
   23. Endurance.
   24. Emergencies.
   25. Enemies.
   26. Experiment.
   27. Envy.
   28. Equality.
   29. Electricity.
   30. Fishing.
   31. Fire.
   32. Friends.
   33. Faces.
   34. Flowers.
   35. Farm, The.
   36. Frankness.
   37. Familiarity.
   38. Gossip.
   39. Golf.
   40. Geniality.
   41. Ghosts.
   42. Honesty.
   43. Horse, The.
   44. Hospitals.
   45. Industry.
   46. Immigration.
   47. Immortality.
   48. Invention.
   49. Inspiration.
   50. Japanese, The.


  LIST II

   51. Laughing.
   52. Marriage.
   53. Mastication.
   54. Meditation.
   55. Manners.
   56. Mob, The.
   57. Money Making.
   58. Newsboy, The.
   59. Old Clothes.
   60. Oratory.
   61. Old Maids.
   62. Positive Thinking.
   63. Pride.
   64. Pictures.
   65. Poetry.
   66. Personal Magnetism.
   67. Progress.
   68. Procrastination.
   69. Pluck.
   70. Prejudice.
   71. Perseverance.
   72. Resourcefulness.
   73. Resolutions.
   74. Real Estate.
   75. Rainy Day, The.
   76. Restaurants.
   77. Railroads.
   78. Relaxation.
   79. Secrets.
   80. Society.
   81. Solitude.
   82. Summer Vacation.
   83. Smoking.
   84. Socialism.
   85. Self-denial.
   86. System.
   87. Simplicity.
   88. Self-confidence.
   89. Sociability.
   90. Skyscrapers.
   91. Suggestion.
   92. Sunshine.
   93. Theater, The.
   94. Temperance.
   95. Trees.
   96. Truth.
   97. Toasts.
   98. Tragedy.
   99. Walking.
  100. Women.


  LIST III

  101. Abraham Lincoln.
  102. Airships.
  103. Anarchist, The.
  104. American Humor.
  105. Arbitration.
  106. America a World Power.
  107. Books.
  108. Brotherhood of Man.
  109. Business.
  110. Bank Account, A.
  111. Clothes.
  112. Character.
  113. Church, The.
  114. Chivalry.
  115. Criminal, The.
  116. Charity.
  117. Capital Punishment.
  118. Conscience.
  119. City Life.
  120. Drama, The.
  121. Devil, The.
  122. Demagog, The.
  123. Divorce.
  124. Doctor, The.
  125. Death Penalty.
  126. Election of Senators.
  127. English Literature.
  128. Education.
  129. Future of America.
  130. Free Speech.
  131. Fear.
  132. Great Men.
  133. Good Luck.
  134. Humor.
  135. Happiness.
  136. Home Life.
  137. Habits.
  138. Health.
  139. "I Will!"
  140. Ideals.
  141. Imagination.
  142. Investments.
  143. Jewelry.
  144. Jury System, The.
  145. Love.
  146. Lawyer, The.
  147. Leadership.
  148. Murder Trials.
  149. Mistakes.
  150. Might and Right.


  LIST IV

  151. Millionaires.
  152. Municipal Ownership.
  153. Man's Chance at Fifty, A.
  154. Modern Advertising.
  155. Music.
  156. Newspaper, The.
  157. Negro, The.
  158. National Ideals.
  159. Originality.
  160. Optimism.
  161. Opportunity.
  162. Pessimist, The.
  163. Power of Silence, The.
  164. Power.
  165. Poverty.
  166. Public Opinion.
  167. Phrenology.
  168. Pathos.
  169. Patent Medicines.
  170. Politics.
  171. Prosperity.
  172. Physical Culture.
  173. Public Speaking.
  174. Poverty and Crime.
  175. Personality.
  176. Panics.
  177. Religion.
  178. Reformers.
  179. Self-criticism.
  180. Strenuous Life, The.
  181. Stock Speculation.
  182. Selfishness.
  183. Sympathy.
  184. Suicide.
  185. Self-culture.
  186. Success.
  187. Story-telling.
  188. Specialist, The.
  189. Survival of the Fittest.
  190. Salesmanship.
  191. Slang.
  192. Shakespeare.
  193. Sleep.
  194. Trusts.
  195. Travel.
  196. Tramp, The.
  197. Tipping the Waiter.
  198. Unemployed, The.
  199. Wealth and Happiness.
  200. Woman Suffrage.




  SPECIMEN
  ONE-MINUTE SPEECHES



A MINUTE

In one minute a man can run about a quarter of a mile, if he is a
good runner; a horse can trot about half a mile, if it is a good
trotter, and can run about three-quarters of a mile if it is a
thoroughbred.  In the same period of time, the Empire State Express
goes something more than a mile, and a racing automobile about two
miles.  As the earth turns on its axis, its surface, at the Equator,
travels about seventeen miles a minute, and in its greater journey in
its ellipse around the sun the earth rushes through space at the rate
of a thousand miles a minute.  In this country alone, about five
times every minute, or once in every twelve seconds, the last
good-bys are said and a soul solves the great mystery of eternity.
The minute which is gone can never be recalled, while the next minute
is fraught with uncertainty.  We are sure--not of this minute, but of
this instant only, of time.  Then, while we may, let us say the
loving word, do the kind act, suppress the unkind remark, encourage
those who are struggling by the way--this minute.




LINCOLN AS A SPEAKER

President Lincoln owed his success as a speaker to his ancestry and
parentage, his knowledge of human nature, and his mastery of English.
His Puritan-pioneer ancestry endowed him with the great physical and
mental vigor that characterized all his life; and his parents
inspired him with the love of learning, the high moral sense and the
devotion to truth, freedom and religion, that made him the man we so
revere.  His knowledge of human nature was due to his early life and
studies, and is best illustrated by his use of stories.  By them he
could at need rebuke, explain, or encourage, for he had studied men
till he knew them and their motives as he did his scanty library.
His mastery of English was due to his study of the best models in our
tongue, the Bible, Shakespeare, Milton, and Blackstone.  These books
he read until he had memorized their words and absorbed their spirit
so thoroughly that when he came to clothe in words his own great and
wise thoughts he spake as a master of English style.  Lincoln's early
environment was rough, but he made it subserve great and mighty
purposes; and those of us who labor in his spirit may hope also to do
great works.




SALESMANSHIP

What kind of a man should the salesman be, in order to be successful?
The essential qualifications are, good health, good appearance, a
thorough knowledge of what he offers for sale, and a general
knowledge of his competitors' goods.  Furthermore, he must know how
to judge a customer, so as to present his thoughts in a manner to
gain his confidence.  He should also develop his sense of humor, in
order to overcome the "hard knocks" that may be in store for him.  He
must be able to smile, no matter what happens.  If he possesses these
qualifications, together with the proper goods to sell, plus the
capacity for _work, work, work,_ then he will assuredly make a
successful salesman.




PROVIDENCE

If genius is a mark of divine Providence made manifest in the
preferred of human kind, the life of Lincoln shows clearly the power
and guidance of God.  Notwithstanding the adverse conditions
surrounding his early life, he struggled upward, almost unknowingly,
to the preeminent position of power and trust ordained for him, fully
equipped to meet and master every problem.  Like all God's
ambassadors, his life ended when his life's great work was done, and
returning to his long home, he left "Footprints, that perhaps
another, sailing o'er life's solemn main, a forlorn and shipwrecked
brother seeing, shall take heart again."




BISMARCK

Bismarck lived up to his claim that difference between nations could
only be settled through "blood and iron."  The key-note of his public
policy was, to make Prussia the leading power of the Germanic States,
and to create a United Germany with the King of Prussia as German
Emperor.  The first task was accomplished at Sadowa, in 1866, where
the Austrian army was defeated.  The second task--Paris capitulated
according to terms dictated by him and King William was proclaimed
"German Emperor" at Versailles on January 18, 1871.  In the estimate
of Europe and of the world, he then ranked as the greatest living
diplomat and statesman.  As Chancellor of the German Empire, he
insisted above all that Germany should keep its place at the head of
Europe as a military power.  His theory was "As we shall attack
nobody, we shall have peace, if we show ourselves so strong that
nobody will attack us."  It is in this theory that many men now
repose their faith in the peace of the world.




GEORGE WASHINGTON

There is no individual whose life is more closely identified with the
history of his country than George Washington.  You all know the
story of his life by heart.  To-day, on the anniversary of his birth,
it is proper and fitting for Americans to dwell upon the virtues of
this great man.  Washington's character was magnanimous.  He was kind
to the aged, and sympathetic toward his fellow men.  Thomas Jefferson
may have had Washington in mind when he wrote, in the Declaration of
Independence, the words "Life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness."
He was a brave and courageous patriot, with the rare power of
persuading men.  Persuasion!  Listen to his words to his soldiers
after their disastrous defeat in the battle of Long Island: "The eyes
of all our countrymen are now upon us, and we shall have their
blessings and praises if happily we are the instruments of saving
them from the tyranny meditated against them.  Let us, therefore,
animate and encourage each other, and show the whole world that a
freeman contending for liberty on his own ground is superior to any
slavish mercenary on earth."  Gentlemen, do you feel the power of
those inspiring words?




A DEDICATION

We have met here to-night to dedicate this beautiful church to the
memory of the late Russell Sage, given by Mrs. Sage to the
congregation of the First Presbyterian Church of Far Rockaway as a
testimonial of his fidelity to the old church which this new one will
replace.  I, therefore, warmly congratulate you upon the interesting
object which has caused you to assemble, in such numbers and spirit,
as you have here to-night.  This occasion is in some respects
remarkable.  Wise and thoughtful men who have led their race in
finance have accumulated great wealth, and it is only the true
Christian principle which this man possest, that has led to the
erection of this magnificent church.  They lend grace, glory, and
honor to the object for which we have here assembled, and may God's
blessing rest upon her, the donor of this gift, and upon him in whose
name it is given, and upon you, and upon all the future congregations
of this church forever.  Animated by these sentiments may we
earnestly strive to make this in the highest and truest sense, a
temple of the living God.




GOVERNMENT BY THE PEOPLE

The powers of our republican form of government originated with the
governed.  It is the theory of our fundamental law that the people
choose their representatives, yet no fact is so true as that this
object is deliberately thwarted of accomplishment.  Nor is it less
true that the primary cause of this condition may be traced to a
sordid commercialism which pervades the body politic and stops not
even at the threshold of government.  But whatever may be known of
alliances between predatory interests and party leaders, whatever may
be known of corruption of public officials, it is beyond denial that
a despotic influence invades alike political conventions and the
halls of legislatures.  Policies sacrificing the public welfare are
dedicated by a bold and powerful coterie of men whose motives are
governed, not by a sense of right, but by the false ethics of
expediency and self-interest.  Shall this system forever prevail, or
shall the intelligence and conscience of the people be aroused to its
iniquity, and the money-changers be driven from the temple of our
government?  There can be but one answer.  Remembering with
Lincoln--and with Hughes--that ours is a government of the people,
and for the people, let us return to the pure ideal of the
Constitution and secure a government by the people.




BREVITY

The feature of any address should be its brevity.  Few people realize
the importance of this, on account of their very great love for self.
I often recall the story of the Rev. Dr. Joseph Channing, whose
brother was an eminent surgeon in New York.  One day a stranger
called on the medical doctor in error, and after being admitted said,
"I hope you are well, but you have changed considerably since I heard
you preach."  "Heard me preach?" said Dr. Channing.  "Why, yes,"
preach?" said Dr. Channing.  "Why, yes," answered the visitor;
"aren't you the Dr. Channing that preaches?"  "No; I am the doctor
that practises," answered the eminent physician.  And so do I.




PUBLIC SPEAKING

A course in public speaking is a most desirable training for the
professional or commercial man.  It will give him training to address
a public meeting, but it will also greatly improve his conversational
powers.  It will make him careful in the selection of his words,
their pronunciation and exact meaning; it will extend his vocabulary
and give more power and intonation to his voice.  It will also train
his mind to quick thinking and to select without hesitation just such
words as are best adapted to express his thoughts.  Few people can
speak out their ideas in a clear, concise manner, and fewer yet can
ask a good, direct question that goes to the very heart of an issue.
And yet, this ability to frame a concise question at the right moment
is one of the most desirable attainments for a person that has much
intercourse with his fellow men.




HENRY CLAY

Picture in your mind's eye a tall, gaunt, melancholic figure--a
product of the wilderness--not handsome but of noble character, of
commanding appearance, indomitable courage, and magnetic
personality--picture this and you have a mental vision of Henry Clay.
His voice was powerful, as his logic was keen and convincing.  He was
resourceful in sarcasm, wit and satire, which made him an opponent to
be feared in debate.  His time was contemporaneous with such giants
as John Calhoun, the silver-tongued son of the South, and Daniel
Webster, the favored orator of Massachusetts.  It was the "Golden Age
of American Oratory," but in the legislative councils of the nation
Henry Clay towered above them all, admittedly America's most popular
statesman.  Notwithstanding this, the Presidency was denied him twice
by an ungrateful republic, merely because he dared be right rather
than be President.  This is the spirit that should inspire our young
men of to-day, and fit them for true leadership.




WOMAN AND SPEECH

"Let your women keep silence in the churches," is sometimes
misunderstood to mean that women disobey a Bible injunction when they
engage in public speaking.  On the contrary, Saint Paul realized the
demoralizing influences surrounding the Church of Corinth, and
forbade female questioning.  So far from commanding women to be
silent, he specially commends the Greek woman Phoebe as minister in
the Greek church of Cinchua.  Most of the converts to Christianity
were made by women who spoke and spoke well.  The missionary movement
in China, Japan, and India utterly failed until women who could speak
persuasively were sent.  Nearly all the work of the Salvation Army is
done by women, and its leader in this country is a woman.  Who are
the women of influence in America to-day?  They are those who can
speak well--teachers, lecturers, social workers, and others engaged
in professional and business pursuits.  Who are the coming women of
this country?  Those who can speak their innermost convictions with
certainty and power, help to solve great national problems, and give
a message to the world that shall ring through the centuries!




BOYS

Boys, you will get out of life just what you put into it.  A smile
and a kind word will be repaid in kind.  A sullen and grouchy
disposition reaps similar fruits through life.  Labor diligently with
your studies; and play just as hard after school sessions.  Many a
man owes his success in life to the companions of his school days.
Learn to lead clean and wholesome lives.  Become thoroughly imbued
with the love of country.  Always salute her glorious flag, which
ever waves for freedom and liberty.  And strive to live all your days
that they will end in peace and happiness.




VOTES FOR WOMEN

The persistence with which the women of the civilized world have
advocated "Woman-Suffrage" has at last borne fruit.  The phrase
"Votes for Women" has become a general topic of conversation wherever
men and women congregate, and has also become one of the leading
political questions of the day.  Professional politicians and the
bosses are alike filled with fear and unrest, as they realize that
women are in earnest and demand, not a privilege, but a right.  It
was Abraham Lincoln who said that no man was good enough to govern
another man without that other man's consent.  The women of this
country say that no man is good enough to govern a woman without that
woman's consent.  They ask that they be given representation in the
government on the same basis as the men.

"Votes for Women" means better laws, better education, and a better
country in which to live.  Victory is already close at hand.  The
fight, for fight it is, is almost won, and soon "Votes for Women"
will no longer be a dream and a hope, but an accomplished fact!




LINCOLN

Lincoln's power lay in his common sense and clear judgment.  He was
unquestionably inspired.  He was not a creature of circumstances, but
surely one of God's elect.  Studying his life, we see little amid his
early surroundings to assist or guide him, save light from heaven.
Yet he reached manhood strong and brave, overcame every obstacle, and
so controlled his natural feelings and tendencies toward visionary
dreams, that he developed all his faculties for the practical uses of
everyday life.  Fearless in his convictions, he zealously urged them
upon his fellow men with the gifted powers of an orator.  He reached
the place of eminence for which he was destined, despite the
bitterest opposition, because he was thoroughly equipped for every
emergency.  What was the secret of this man's greatness?  It was
inspiration from God.




  THE VALUE OF THE PUBLIC SPEAKING
  CLUB TO THE BUSINESS MAN

The question has been asked, "Of what practical value is the Public
Speaking Club to the business man?"  My answer is because it teaches
him to think.  There is no greater difficulty confronting the
business man to-day than that of finding men to fill positions where
initiative and original thought are necessary.  The call comes from
the business world everywhere, "Give us men of ideas--men of
ability--men who have mastered the art of thinking for themselves."
Our schools and colleges are engaged in the task of storing the mind
with facts.  This is a splendid work, but we need to go one step
farther, we must teach men how to apply and develop and use this
knowledge.  It is not how much a man knows that makes him a
successful business man; it is what he thinks and does.  Success is
not measured by the size of a man's hat.  The educational problem of
the hour is not one of better schools and larger public libraries; it
is the practical development of the mind; it is the awakening of the
creative powers of thought, the birth of new ideas; it is training
men how to put these ideas into concrete form, how to present and
express them in such words and with such power that they shall carry
conviction to the hearts of their fellow men.




THE STUDY OF FORENSIC ELOQUENCE



THE STUDY OF FORENSIC ELOQUENCE


By ISAAC GRANT THOMPSON

There is another essential, aside from the knowledge of the law, for
the successful court lawyer--that is eloquence; the sort of eloquence
which Blair defines to be "the art of speaking in such a manner as to
attain the end for which we speak."  Most young men, who study with a
view of coming to the bar, have an ambition, more or less strong, to
become advocates--to be able to convince judges and persuade juries
by the power of their logic and the graces of their style and
utterance; but a visit to our courts is but too likely to show how
lamentably the great majority of them fail of achieving their desire.

Lack of perseverance in performing the labor necessary to the student
of elocution, or ignorance of the method to be pursued; or, in many
cases, a notion that orators, like poets, "are born, not made," has
served to make the number of eloquent advocates very small indeed.

The most universal idea seems to prevail, that industry can effect
nothing; that every one must be content to remain just what he
happens to be, and that eminence is the result of accident.  For the
acquirement of any other art, men expect to serve long
apprenticeships; to study it carefully and laboriously; to master it
thoroughly.  If one would learn to sing, he attends a master and is
drilled in the elementary principles; and it is only after the most
careful discipline that he dares to exercise his voice in public.  If
he would learn to play a musical instrument, how patiently and
persistently does he study and practise, that he may draw out, at
will, all its various combinations of harmonious sounds, and its full
richness and delicacy of expression.  "And yet," adds a learned
writer, "a man will fancy that the grandest, the most complex, the
most expressive of all instruments, which is fashioned by the union
of intellect with power of speech, may be played upon without study
or practise.  He comes to it a mere tyro, and thinks to manage all
its stops, and command the whole compass of its varied and
comprehensive power; he finds himself a mere bungler in the attempt,
wonders at his failure, and settles it in his mind forever that the
attempt is vain"--that it can be done only by genius.

Nothing can be more mischievous and unfortunate to the student than
for him to fall into such an error--to hold the opinion that
excellence in speaking is a gift of nature and not the result of
patient and persistent labor and study.  If all men had entertained
and acted upon such an opinion, those who have won fame and honor by
their eloquence would have remained mute and inglorious.  Never would
Demosthenes have charmed an Athenian audience, nor Cicero have hurled
his denunciations against Cataline.  Lord Chatham would have remained
simple William Pitt, and Erskine live an ordinary English barrister.
Curran would have been "Orator Mum" to the end of his days, and
Choate died "unwept, unhonored, and unsung."

Men who believe that eloquence is the result of genius, and not of
labor, are like the dwellers in the East, as described by Sir Joshua
Reynolds in his address to the pupils of the Royal Academy.  He says:
"The travelers into the East tell us that when the ignorant
inhabitants of those countries are asked concerning the ruins of
stately edifices yet remaining among them, the melancholy monuments
of their former grandeur and long-lost science, they always answer:
'They were built by magicians.'  The untaught mind finds a vast gulf
between its own powers and those works of complicated art, which it
is utterly unable to fathom; and it supposes that such a void can be
passed only by supernatural powers."  What Sir Joshua says of
painting is true of oratory.  Those who know not the cause of any
thing extraordinary and beyond them may well be astonished at the
_effect_; and what the uncivilized ascribe to magic others ascribe to
genius--two mighty pretenders who, for the most part, are safe from
rivalry only because by the terror of their names they discourage in
their own peculiar sphere that resolute and sanguine spirit of
enterprise which is essential to success.  But as has been well said,
"all magic is science in disguise," and it is our object to proceed
to take off the mask--to show that the mightiest objects of our
wonder, so far as eloquence is concerned, are mere men like
ourselves, have attained their superiority by steps which we can
follow, and that we can walk in the same path even tho there remain
at last a broad space between us.

Lord Chesterfield was not very far wrong when, in his letters to his
son, he told him that any man of reasonable abilities might make
himself an orator; not an orator like Cicero's magnificent myth, who
should have "the acuteness of the logician, the wisdom of the
philosophers, the language almost of poetry, the memory of lawyers,
the voice of tragedians, the gesture of the best actors"; such
orators, we admit, must be _nascitur, non fit_--born, not made--and
they are rarely to be found; but orators like Pitt and Fox, like
Mansfield and Erskine, like Pinckney and Choate--orators who can
"sway listening senates," who are stormy masters of the jury-box.

Chesterfield was perhaps an illustration of his own theory, for he
said that he at one time determined to make himself the best speaker
in Parliament, and set about a severe course of training for it; and
we have the opinion of so able a judge as Horace Walpole that he was
the first speaker of the House.  Every schoolboy can tell you of the
gigantic labors of Demosthenes in training himself for a public
speaker.  It will be refreshing for any student who desires to
improve himself in speaking to turn to Plutarch's life of
Demosthenes, and read of his early struggles with obstacles which
would have discouraged at the threshold the great majority of
mankind.  Laughed at and interrupted by the clamor of the people in
his first efforts, by reason of his violent and awkward manner, and a
weakness and stammering in his voice, he retired to his house with
covered head and in great distress, yet not disheartened.  At one
time he complained to Satyrus, the player, "that tho he was the most
laborious of all the orators, and had almost sacrificed his health to
that application, yet he could gain no favor with the people."
Satyrus seems to have been a judicious adviser, and proceeded to
correct his faults, as Hume says he who teaches eloquence must--by
example.  He requested Demosthenes to read some speech from Euripides
or Sophocles.  When he had done, Satyrus pronounced the same speech
with so much propriety of action that it appeared to the orator quite
a different passage.  "He now understood so well," says Plutarch,
"how much grace and dignity of action adds to the best oration, that
he thought it a small matter to premeditate and compose, tho with the
utmost care, if the pronunciation and propriety of gesture were not
attended to.  Upon this he built himself a subterranean study,
whither he repaired every day to form his action and exercise his
voice; and he would often stay there two or three months together,
shaving one side of his head, that if he should happen to be ever so
desirous of going abroad, the shame of appearing in that condition
might keep him in."  The contemporaries of Demosthenes esteemed him
as a man of but little genius, and concluded that all his eloquence
was the result of labor.  Certain it is that he was seldom heard to
speak _extempore_; and tho often called upon in the assembly to
speak, he would not do it unless he came prepared.  It is undoubtedly
true, that nature had sowed in Demosthenes the seeds of a great
orator; but they were brought to perfection only by the most patient
labor and severe discipline--labor and discipline that would make any
student of the law, of ordinary judgment and sense, the equal of
Pinckney, of Wirt, or of Choate.

Think of the eloquence of Cicero!  How wonderful the grandeur and
magnificence of his style; how copious and elegant his diction; how
various and comprehensive his knowledge; surely, we say, like the
dwellers in the East, this is the work of magic--of genius.  But when
we take off the mask we find that it is mainly the result of careful,
unflagging, untiring study and practise.  Middleton says: "His
industry was incredible, beyond the example or even conception of our
days; this was the secret by which he performed such wonders, and
reconciled perpetual study with perpetual affairs."

Nor were these orators of antiquity singular in their devotion to the
_art_ of speaking.  All the great orators of modern times have
emulated their greatness by emulating their love of labor.  Lord
Chatham, who has been justly regarded as the most powerful orator of
modern times, was from his early youth a most laborious and devoted
student of oratory.  His biography says of him: "At the age of
eighteen, Mr. Pitt (afterward Lord Chatham) was removed to the
University of Oxford.  Here, in connection with his other studies, he
entered on that severe course of rhetorical training which he often
referred to in after life as forming so large a part of his early
discipline.  He took up the practise of writing out translations from
the ancient orators and historians, on the broadest scale.
Demosthenes was his model; and we are told that he rendered a large
part of his orations again and again into English, as the best means
of acquiring a forcible and expressive style....  As a means of
acquiring copiousness of diction and an exact choice of words, Mr.
Pitt also read and reread the sermons of Dr. Barrow till he knew many
of them by heart.  With the same view he performed a task, to which,
perhaps, no other student in oratory has ever submitted.  _He went
twice through the folio dictionary of Bailey, examining each word_
attentively, dwelling on its peculiar import and modes of
construction, and thus endeavoring to bring the whole range of our
language completely under his control.  At this time, also, he began
those exercises in elocution by which he is known to have obtained
his extraordinary powers of delivery.  Tho gifted by nature with a
commanding voice and person, he spared no effort to add everything
that art could confer for his improvement as an orator."  His success
was commensurate with his zeal.  Garrick himself was not a greater
actor, in that higher sense of the term in which Demosthenes declared
action to be the first, and second, and third thing in oratory.  The
labor which he bestowed on these exercises was surprizingly great.
Probably no man of genius since the days of Cicero has ever submitted
to an equal amount of drudgery.

Lord Mansfield, equally famous as an advocate and judge, affords us
another example of unwearying patient discipline.  He studied oratory
with the greatest fervor and diligence.  He read everything that had
been written on the subject of the art; he made himself familiar with
all the great masters of eloquence in Greece and Rome, and spent much
of his time in translating their finest productions as the best means
of improving his style.  During his study of the law at Lincoln's
Inn, he carried on the practise of oratory with the utmost zeal, and
was a constant attendant and speaker in a debating society which he
had joined.  One day, says his biographer, he was surprized by a
friend, who suddenly entered his room, in "the act of practising
before a glass, while Pope (the poet) sat by to aid him in the
character of an instructor."  Such are the arts by which are produced
those results that the uninitiated ascribe to genius.

Sheridan was one of the most brilliant orators of modern times, and
yet his maiden speech in Parliament, delivered when he was nearly
thirty years old, was a failure.  Woodfall, the reporter, used to
relate that Sheridan came up to him in the gallery, when the speech
was ended, and asked him, with much anxiety, what he thought of his
first attempt.  "I am sorry to say," replied Woodfall, "that I don't
think this is your line; you would better have stuck to your former
pursuit."  Sheridan rested his head on his hand for a few minutes,
and then exclaimed, with vehemence: "It is _in_ me, and it _shall
come out of me_."  Quickened by a sense of shame, he now devoted
himself, with the utmost assiduity, to the cultivation of his powers
as a speaker.  Seven years after he brought forward, in the House of
Commons, the charges against Warren Hastings, relating to the
princesses of Oude, in a speech of such brilliancy and eloquence that
the whole assembly, at its conclusion, broke forth into expressions
of tumultuous applause, and the House adjourned to recover from the
excitement produced by it.  Pitt said, "An abler speech was perhaps
_never delivered_," and Fox and Windham, years after, spoke of it
with undiminished admiration.  As Sheridan had said to Woodfall, it
_was_ in him and it _did_ come out, but it was wrought out by patient
toil and study.  Moore paints him at his desk at work on this very
speech--writing and erasing with all the care and painstaking of a
special pleader.  Indeed, it transpired after his death that his wit
was most of it studied out before hand.  His commonplace book was
found to be full of humorous thoughts and sportive turns, written
first in one form and then in another--the point shifted from one
part of the sentence to another to try the effect.  How little did
his delighted hearers imagine, as some playful allusion, keen retort,
or brilliant sally flashed out upon them from his speeches, in a
manner so easy, natural, and yet unexpected, that it had been long
before laboriously molded and manufactured.  Johnson tells us that
Butler, the author of "Hudibras," had garnered up his wit in the same
way.  How conclusively do these examples illustrate the truth of Sir
Joshua Reynolds' remark, that the effects of genius must have their
causes, and that these may, for the most part, be analyzed, digested,
and copied, tho sometimes they may be too subtle to be reduced to a
written art.

Charles James Fox rose, says Mr. Burke, "by slow degrees, to be the
most brilliant and accomplished debater the world ever knew," and Fox
himself has told us the secret of his skill.  He gained it, he says,
"at the expense of the House," for he had frequently tasked himself,
during an entire session, to speak on every question that came up,
whether he was interested in it or not, as a means of exercising and
training his faculties.

Curran, the Irish orator and advocate, was known at school as
"stuttering Jack Curran"; and, while studying at an Inn of Court, the
members of a debating society to which he belonged called him "Orator
Mum," in honor of his signal failure as a speaker.  But he made up
his mind to become an orator, and was not to be put down by
obstacles.  He spent his mornings, as he states, "in reading even to
exhaustion," and the rest of the day in the more congenial pursuits
of literature, and especially in unremitting efforts to perfect
himself as a speaker.  His voice was bad, and his articulation hasty
and confused; his manner was awkward, his gestures constrained and
meaningless, and his whole appearance calculated only to produce
laughter.  Such is the picture of him left us by his biographers.
Surely, one would think, an orator could never be made out of such
materials.  Yet all these faults he overcame by severe and patient
labor.  Constantly on the watch against bad habits, he practised
daily before a glass, reciting passages from Shakespeare, Junius, and
the best English orators.  He frequented debating societies, and
unmindful of the ridicule that greeted his repeated failures, he
continued to take part in the discussions.  At last, he surmounted
every difficulty.  "He turned his shrill and stumbling brogue," says
one of his friends, "into a flexible, sustained, and finely-modulated
voice; his action became free and forcible; and he acquired perfect
readiness in thinking on his legs"; in short, he became one of the
most brilliant and eloquent advocates that the world has ever
produced.  Well might one of his biographers say: "His oratorical
training was as severe as any Greek ever underwent."

The biographies of Pultney, of Burke, of Pitt, of Erskine, of
Grattan, of Brougham--of all the great orators of England--contain
records of the same careful training and discipline in the art of
speaking.

Nor have American orators found the path to success less difficult.
Rufus Choate--who was, perhaps, the most accomplished advocate
America has yet produced--was a noble illustration of what systematic
culture and discipline can do.  He was, in the truest sense of the
term, a made orator.  Forensic rhetoric was the great study of his
life, and he pursued it with a patience, a steadiness, a zeal, equal
to that of Chatham or Curran.  He trusted to no native gift of
eloquence, but practised elocution every day for forty years as a
critical study.  Everything that could be prepared, was prepared;
every nerve, every muscle, that could be trained was trained; every
power that daily practise could strengthen was invigorated.  So
thoroughly imbued was he with a zeal for oratory, that it formed the
subject of his almost daily conversation, as it did of his daily
practise; and his biography will rouse an ambitious student as the
sound of the trumpet does the war-horse.

Daniel Webster may, perhaps, be considered to have been as nearly a
_natural_ orator as any this country has produced; and yet the
students are few indeed that cultivate the art of oratory so
laboriously as he did.  Even his genius was mainly "science in
disguise."  He himself told the late Senator Fessenden that those
figures and illustrations in his speeches, which had become so famous
and been so often quoted, were, like Sheridan's wit, the result of
previous study and preparation; and that that passage in his speech,
wherein he describes the glory and the power of England--a passage
known and quoted the world over--was conceived and fashioned while he
was standing on the American side of the Niagara River, listening to
the British drum-beats on the Canada shore.

From these examples we may learn that all truly noble orators in
every age have trusted, not to inspiration, but to discipline; that
great as were their natural abilities, they were much less than the
ignorant rated them; that even the mightiest condescended to certain
rules and methods of study by which the humblest are able to profit.
It is good for the student to read of the studies and labors, the
trials and conflicts, the difficulties and triumphs, of such men.  It
is to the ambitious student as the touch of mother earth was to
Antæus in his struggle with Hercules--renewing his strength and
reviving his flagging zeal.  It rouses him to severer self-denial, to
more assiduous study, to more self-sustaining confidence, and leads
him to feel, like Themistocles of old, that "the trophies of
Miltiades will not let me sleep."  These examples will teach him that
God has set a price on every real and noble achievement; that success
in oratory, as in everything else worth succeeding in, can be
purchased only by pain and labor; and lastly and mainly, that those
who would follow in their steps must give their days and nights to
study, and emulate their greatness by emulating their love of labor.

Having endeavored to show that eloquence is not so much the result of
natural gifts as of persevering and persistent labor, we now proceed
to offer some suggestions as to the best means of improvement in
forensic eloquence.

Socrates used to say that "all men are sufficiently eloquent in that
which they understand"; but it would have been nearer truth to say
that no man can be eloquent on a subject that he does not understand;
nor on a subject that he does understand, unless he know how to form
and polish his speech.  The two essential things to the orator are
something to say and a knowledge of how to say it.  There is no art
that can teach one to be eloquent without knowledge.  Attention to
style, diction, and all the arts of speech, can only assist the
orator in setting off to advantage the stock of materials which he
possesses; but the stock, the materials themselves, must be brought
from other quarters than from rhetoric.  In the first place, the
advocate must have a profound knowledge of the law.  On this depends
his reputation and success, and nothing is of such consequence to him
or deserves more his deep and serious study.  In no other profession
is superficial knowledge sooner detected or more ruthlessly exposed,
and however brilliant as a speaker one may be, if it but become known
that he is not well grounded in the law, few will choose to commit
their cause to him.  Besides a knowledge of the general principles of
law, another thing highly material to the success of every advocate
is a diligent and careful attention to every cause that is intrusted
to him, so as to be thoroughly master of all the facts and
circumstances relating to it, Cicero has left a very instructive
record of the method pursued by him in the preparation of a cause for
trial, and which we commend to the careful consideration of every
student and lawyer.  He tells us, under the character of Antonius, in
the second book _De Oratore_, that he always conversed at full length
with every client who came to consult him; that he took care there
should be no witnesses to their conversation, in order that his
client might explain himself more freely; that he was wont to start
every objection, and to plead the cause of the adverse party with
him, that he might come at the whole truth and be fully prepared on
every point of the business; and that after the client had retired he
used to balance all the facts with himself under three different
characters: his own, that of the adversary, and that of the judge.
He censures very severely those of the profession who decline to take
so much trouble; taxing them not only with shameful negligence, but
with dishonesty and breach of trust.  Quintilian likewise urged the
necessity of carefully studying every cause, again and again
recommending patience and attention in conversation with clients.
"For," said he, "to listen to something that is superfluous can do no
hurt; whereas to be ignorant of something that is material may be
highly prejudicial.  The advocate will frequently discover the weak
side of a cause, and learn at the same time what is the proper
defense, from circumstances which to the party himself appeared to be
of little or no moment."  It is said of Rufus Choate, that he began
to study a case the moment it was brought to him, and that he
continued to study it till the day of trial.

Besides the knowledge of the law, the advocate must make himself
acquainted with the general principles of logic.  He must learn how
to _reason_; how to draw conclusions from premises; how to found an
argument.  Without a knowledge of these things, no matter how copious
his diction or elegant his delivery, his speeches will be little more
than "sounding brass and tinkling cymbals."

The object of the advocate is chiefly to convince, and to do this he
must satisfy the understanding.  Solid argument and clear method
must, therefore, be used.  Nothing can be more erroneous than the
idea that mere declamation is eloquence.  It may have the show, but
never can produce the effect; it "may tickle the ear," but it will
never lead a judge to pass that judgment or a jury to adopt that side
of the cause to which we seek to bring them.  "There is no talent, I
apprehend," said Dugald Stewart, "so essential to a public speaker as
to be able to state clearly every step of those trains of thought by
which he himself was led to the conclusions he wishes to establish."
Especially is this true at the bar--the eloquence suited to which is
of the calm and temperate kind, connected with close reasoning.  Let
the advocate take for his motto the advice of Quintilian, "To your
expression be attentive; but about your matter be solicitous."

There was much wisdom in the remark of Sir William Jones, that "an
elegant method of arranging the thoughts is powerful to persuade as
well as to please."  William Pitt, being asked how he acquired his
talent for _reply_, answered at once that he owed it to the study of
Aristotle's logic in early life, and the habit of applying its
principles to all the discussions he met with in the works he read
and the debates he witnessed.  So it is said of Rufus Choate, "he was
a thorough master of logic.  He had studied it, not only in detail
and immediate application of style and arrangement, but in its
essence and origin."

The treatise best calculated to give the student an insight into the
rules and principles of logic is that by Dr. Whately.  The book
recommended for the strengthening of the reasoning faculties is
Chillingworth's "The Religion of Protestants a Safe Way to
Salvation," which was written in answer to the arguments of an
adversary, and which has for years been considered the most perfect
specimen of logical argument.  Locke, than whom there could not be a
more competent authority, proposes "for the attainment of right
reasoning, the constant reading of Chillingworth"; and Lord Mansfield
pronounced it the "perfection of reasoning."

Law and logic are the immediate and foundation studies of the
advocate, but they are not all.  Besides these he must drink deep at
the fountains of science, philosophy, history and _belles-lettres_.
These are the handmaids of oratory.  They enlarge and liberalize the
mind, embellish the style and afford illustrations, ideas, arguments,
phrases, words, and last, tho not least, intellectual enthusiasm.
There are few occasions, indeed, on which an advocate will not derive
assistance from a cultivated taste and extensive knowledge.  Their
illustrations, allusions and principles, woven in with the weightier
matters of the law, will make a pattern which will not fail to please
and interest--will throw around the dry and uninteresting legal
principles a freshness and charm that will fix the attention and
fascinate the hearer.

But perhaps the chief benefit to be derived from their study is the
improvement they afford to style and language.  Cicero remarked in
the third book _De Oratore_, that "all elegance of language, tho it
receive a polish from the science of grammar, is yet augmented by the
reading of orators and poets."  From this source have all great
orators drawn their copious and elegant diction and their polished
and graceful style.  Erskine is represented by an excellent authority
as having spoken the finest and richest English ever spoken by an
advocate.  For two years prior to his call to the bar, he devoted
himself exclusively to the study of literature, and probably no two
years of his life were so profitably spent.  In addition to his
reading in prose, he devoted himself with great ardor to the study of
Milton and Shakespeare.  His biographers tell us that he committed a
large part of the former to memory, and became so familiar with the
latter "that he could almost, like Person, have held conversations on
all subjects for days together in the phrases of the great English
dramatist."  Here it was that he acquired that fine choice of words,
that rich and varied imagery, that sense of harmony in the structure
of his sentences, that boldness of thought and magnificence of
expression for which he was afterward so much distinguished.  He
could have drawn these things from no richer source.  To use the
words of Johnson, slightly varied, he who would excel in this noblest
of arts must give his days and nights to the study of Milton and
Shakespeare.

    "Hither, as to a fountain,
  Other suns repair, and in their urns
  Draw golden light."


Lord Chatham read and reread Dr. Barrows' sermons until he knew many
of them by heart, "for the purpose," as he himself said, "of
acquiring copiousness of diction and an exact choice of words."
William Pitt, his son, obtained his remarkable command of the English
tongue from the same source, in connection with Shakespeare and the
Bible; the latter he studied not only as a guide of life, but as the
true "_well_ of English undefiled."  No wonder that his contemporary,
Fox, should have said of him, "He always has the right word in the
right place."

William Pinckney has himself unlocked the secret of his intellectual
affluence and elegant diction.  He says that he made it a rule from
his youth never to see a fine idea without committing it to memory.
Rufus Choate, in speaking of this fact, said "the result was the most
splendid and powerful English spoken style I ever heard."  Choate
pursued a plan equally commendable.  During the greater portion of
his life he made it a practise to read aloud every day a page or more
from some fine English author.  This he did for the improvement of
his expression.  He was a most indefatigable student of _words_, and
made the whole round of literature tributary to his vocabulary.

The following extract from the address of Lord Brougham to the
University of Glasgow will be a sufficient guide, with what has been
already said, to the selection of those authors that will tend most
to improve the style and diction: "The English writers who really
unlock the rich sources of the language are those who flourish from
the end of Elizabeth's to the end of Queen Anne's reign; who used a
good Saxon dialect with ease, but correctness and
perspicuity--learned in the ancient classics, but only enriching
their mother tongue where the Attic could supply its defects--not
overlaying it with a profuse pedantic coinage of words."

The great masters of oratory should be studied most carefully and
diligently; Erskine, Burke, Pinckney, Webster, and, above all, the
legal orations of Cicero are the best models for a young lawyer.
Read Bolingbroke for specimens of the splendid and ornate; Fox and
Pitt for the classical and argumentative; advantage may likewise be
derived from the letters of Junius.

In pursuing these studies, the motto must be _multum haud
multa_--much, not many.  No real advantage and improvement will be
gained from a rambling, desultory course of reading.  There is a
whole sermon in that saying of Hobbes, of Malmesbury, "If I had read
as many books as other persons, I should probably know as little."
The wisest and best informed teach us, both by counsel and example,
to read a little and that well; to count not by the books we have
read, but by the subjects we have exhausted.  Swift said that the
reason a certain university was a learned place was that most persons
took some learning there and few brought any away with them, so it
accumulated.  Such is the effect of a proper course of
reading--everything adds and nothing takes away.

We are not counseling an imitation of the _men of one book_, but the
pursuit of one system.  Choose those authors most suited to the
object in view and _know_ them.

The advocate should make choice of his book, Shakespeare, Milton,
Bacon, Burke, Erskine, Bolingbroke, and make that his chief study.
One sterling author to call _my own_, ever most conspicuous and most
at hand, read, reread, "marked and quoted," will do much to form the
mind, to teach one to think, to give precision of expression, purity
of taste, loftiness of views and fervency of spirit.  No better
selection can be made by the advocate than the works of Edmund Burke.
"Among the characteristics of Lord Erskine's eloquence," observes one
of his recent biographers, "the perpetual illustrations derived from
the writings of Burke is very remarkable.  In every one of the great
state trials in which he was engaged, he referred to the productions
of that extraordinary person as to a text-book of political
wisdom--expounding, enforcing and justifying all the great and noble
principles of freedom and of justice."  "When I look," says Lord
Erskine himself, "into my own mind and find its best lights and
principles fed from that immense magazine of moral and political
wisdom which he has left an inheritance to mankind for their
instruction, I feel myself repelled by an awful and grateful
sensibility from perpetually approaching him."  Take, then, the words
of this sublime philosopher and orator, bind them up in one thick
volume, on which write _wisdom_ in gold letters, and begin to read it
through every New-year's day.

Another means of acquiring a command of language is translation, and
it is commended alike by the precepts and example of the great
masters.  Two thousand years ago Cicero stocked his vocabulary by
this plan, translating from the Greek into Latin.  Chatham translated
the orations of Demosthenes again and again into English.  Mansfield
declared that there was not one of the orations of Cicero that he had
not translated more than once.  Pitt pursued the same plan for ten
years, and to this he ascribed his extraordinary command of language,
which enabled him to give every idea its most felicitous expression,
and to pour out an unbroken stream of thought hour after hour without
once hesitating for a word or recalling a phrase, or sinking for a
moment into looseness or inaccuracy in the structure of a sentence.
Choate was a most indefatigable translator.  This exercise he
persevered in daily, even in the midst of the most arduous business.
Five minutes a day, if no more, he would seize in the morning for
this task.  Tacitus was his favorite author.  He attended chiefly to
the multiplication of synonyms.  For every word he translated, he
would rack his brain and search his books till he got five or six
corresponding English words.  This is the true way to translate when
style and diction is the object.  Turn the passage read into regular
English sentences, aiming to give the idea with great exactness and
to express it with idiomatic accuracy and ease.  This plan of
translating is infinitely better than the plan sometimes advised of
taking some passage of classic English, getting the ideas from it and
then expressing them in the best manner possible.  In this latter
method, the author has already selected the most appropriate words,
and if the student use the same words he will receive no profit, or
if other words, it is prejudicial, as it accustoms one to use such as
are less eligible.

The student of advocacy can not give too much attention to the
culture of _expression_.  Orators in every age have made it a
specific study.  Cicero says, "The proper concern of an orator, as I
have already often said, is language of power and eloquence
accommodated to the feelings and understanding of mankind."  Language
and its elements, words, are to be mastered by direct, earnest labor.
A speaker ought _daily_ to exercise and air his vocabulary and add to
and enrich it.  The advocate does not want a diction gathered from
the newspapers, caught from the air, common and unsuggestive; but one
whose every word is full freighted with suggestion and association,
with beauty and power.  It is a rich and rare English that one ought
to command, who is aiming to control a jury's ear.

Chesterfield, in his letters to his son, said, "Manner is of as much
importance as matter"; and that this has been the opinion of all
great orators may be gathered from the vast labor expended by them on
the cultivation of expression and delivery.  How much stress was laid
upon this by the greatest of all orators, Demosthenes, appears from a
noted saying of his related by both Cicero and Quintilian, when,
being asked what was the first point in oratory, he answered, action;
and being asked what was the second, he answered, action; and
afterward what was the third, he still answered, action.  And
Plutarch said of him that "he thought it a small matter to
premeditate and compose, tho with the utmost care, if the
pronunciation and propriety of gesture were not attended to."
Esteeming delivery of such vast importance to the orator, there is no
wonder that he should have labored for months together in his
subterranean study to form his action and improve his voice.

To the superficial thinker, the study of gesture and of the
management of the voice may appear to be but "vanity of
vanities"--gaudy tinselry and worthless decoration; but the
experience of all time has proved that they are powerful to persuade
and strong to convince.  We all know how much meaning--how much
expression--how much power there may be in a look, in a tone of the
voice, or in a motion.  The impression they make on others is
frequently much stronger than any that words can make.  They are the
language of nature, and are understood by all far better than words,
which are only the arbitrary conventional symbols of ideas.  The
speaker who should use bare words, without aiding their meaning by
proper tones and accents, would make but a feeble impression, and
leave but a misty and indistinct conception of what he had delivered.

It is surprizing, indeed, to see how perfectly persons practised in
the art of gestures can communicate even complicated trains of
thought and long series of facts without the aid of words.  This fact
was known and appreciated by the ancient Greeks and Romans, who made
the subject a study far more than have subsequent nations.  Cicero
informs us that it was a matter of dispute between the actor Roscius
and himself whether the former could express a sentiment in a greater
variety of ways by gestures, or the latter by words.  During the
reign of Augustus, both tragedies and comedies were acted by
pantomime alone.  It was perfectly understood by the people, who wept
and laughed, and were excited in every way as much as if the words
had been employed.  It seems, indeed, to have worked upon their
sympathies more powerfully than words; for it became necessary, at a
subsequent period, to enact a law restraining members of the Senate
from studying the art of pantomime--a practise to which, it seems,
they had resorted in order to give more effect to their speeches
before that body.

There have been volumes written on this subject of delivery, but they
are little better than a "vexation of spirit."  The tone of the
voice, the look, the gesture, suited to express a thought or emotion,
must be learned from experience and the example of living speakers
and masters.  Curran and many others have made it a practise to speak
before a glass, that they might themselves judge of the propriety of
their gestures, and correct those at fault.  A more condensed or
sensible treatise on this subject can not be found than Hamlet's
direction to the players:

"Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounce it to you--trippingly
on the tongue; but if you mouth it, as many of our players do, I had
as lief the town crier spoke my lines.  Nor do not saw the air too
much with your hand; but use all gently, for in the very torrent,
tempest, and (as I may say) whirlwind of your passion, you must
acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness.  Oh, it
offends me to the soul, to hear a robustious, periwigpated fellow
tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the
groundlings, who, for the most part, are capable of nothing but
inexplicable dumb shows and noise....  Be not too tame, neither, but
let your own discretion be your tutor; suit the action to the word,
the word to the action; with this special observance, that you
o'erstep not the modesty of nature; for anything so overdone is from
the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was,
and is, to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue
her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of
the time, his form and pressure.  Now, this overdone, or come tardy
off, tho it make the unskilful laugh, can not but make the judicious
grieve; the censure of which one must, in your allowance, o'erweigh a
whole theater of others."

The student who shall follow these directions, which are as
applicable to the speaker as to the player, will not go very far
wrong.


The first consideration of a speaker must be to make himself heard by
all those to whom he speaks.  This, tho often neglected, is of the
first importance, and is a matter that rests mainly in the management
of the voice, and not in the strength of lungs.  Nor is it, as many
suppose, a natural talent, for the voice is susceptible of the
greatest culture, and may be formed after almost any model.  To make
oneself audible, it is not necessary that the voice should be pitched
on a high key.  Strength of sound does not depend upon the key or
note on which one speaks, but on the proper management of the voice.
A speaker may render his voice strong and full while speaking in a
middle or conversational tone, and will be able to give the most
sustained force to that pitch, as it is the one to which in
conversation he is accustomed.  The conversational key is the one
that the advocate should, with rare exceptions, adopt; otherwise he
will exhaust himself and be heard with pain by his audience.  Grattan
tells us that he heard Lord Chatham speak in the House of Lords; and
it was just like talking to one man by the buttonhole, except when he
lifted himself in enthusiasm, and then the effect of the outbreak was
immense; and of Harrison Gray Otis it is said that when you met him
in the street and heard him talk, you heard the orator Otis almost as
much as if he were in Faneuil Hall talking about politics.

In the next place, the student of advocacy must study to articulate
clearly and distinctly.  On this, as much as on the quantity of
sound, depends the capacity to make oneself heard.


We need say nothing with regard to emphasis, pauses, tones and
gestures.  Every one who goes about his work in earnest will devote
proper attention to these matters, and will gain more from experience
and observation than from the rules laid down in the books.  One
thing seldom laid down in the books is of the highest importance to
the advocate: that is, to study always to _feel_ what he speaks.
Unless he do this, his oratory will be little more than an empty and
puerile flow of words.  "The author who will make me weep," says
Horace, "must first weep himself."  "In reality," adds Henry
Fielding, "no man can paint a distress well which he doth not feel
while he is painting it; nor do I doubt but that the most pathetic
and affecting scenes have been writ with tears."  In Shakespeare's
Richard II, the Duchess of York thus impeaches the sincerity of her
husband:

  "Pleads he in earnest?  Look upon his face,
  His eyes do drop no tears; his prayers are jest;
  His words come from his mouth; ours, from our breast;
  He prays but faintly and would be denied;
  We pray with heart and soul."


No kind of language is so generally understood, or has such force and
weight, as the language of feeling.  The advocate must be in
downright earnest before he can impress his hearers.

It only remains for us to add, that the student of oratory must
exercise himself continually in both writing and speaking.  Writing
is said by Cicero to be "the best and most excellent modeler and
teacher of oratory"; "for," he continues, "if what is meditated and
considered easily surpasses sudden and extemporaneous speech, a
constant and diligent habit of writing will surely be of more effect
than meditation and consideration itself."  Write with as much pains
as possible, and write as much as possible.  It is even as Quintilian
said: "It is not writing rapidly that you come to write well, but by
writing well you come to write rapidly."  In mental culture, as in
the culture of the earth, the seed sown in the deepest furrows finds
a more fruitful soil, is more securely cherished and springs up in
its time to more exuberant and healthful harvest.  Without this
discipline, the power and practise of extemporaneous speech will
yield only an empty loquacity--only words born on the lips.  In this
discipline, deep down there are the roots, there the foundations;
thence must the harvest shoot, thence the structure ascend; there is
garnered up, as in a more sacred treasury, wealth for the supply of
even unanticipated exactions.  Thus, first of all, we must accumulate
resources sufficient for the contests to which we are summoned.  In
writing, seek for the best; do not eagerly and gladly lay hold on
that which first offers itself; apply judgment to the crowd of
thoughts and words which fill your mind and retain those only of
which your judgment deliberately approves.  Nor should every word be
allowed to occupy the exact spot where the order of time in which it
occurs would place it.  Seek rather by a variety of experiments and
arrangements to attain to the utmost power and eloquence of style.
There is nothing like the pen to correct vagueness of thought and
looseness of expression.  Every argument, every speech should, so far
as possible, be carefully written out.  It is not necessary, nor is
it even advisable, to commit it to memory, save in rare instances.
The mind should be left untrammeled by any set speech to take
advantage of the inspiration of the moment.  But the simple act of
carefully composing and writing down an argument will fix in the mind
the general order and sequence of facts and illustrations, and will
greatly aid in a clear and forcible arrangement.  The night before
Alexander Hamilton delivered his celebrated speech, which more than
anything else led to the establishment of a liberal and more just law
regarding libel and slander in the State of New York, he wrote the
argument all out and then deliberately tore it up.

Besides frequent practise in writing, the student must have constant
practise in speaking, which is of more real value than all the
precepts of the masters.

It is sometimes said that men by speaking succeed in becoming
speakers, but it is just as true that men by speaking badly succeed
in becoming bad speakers.  It is frequently the case, that students
do nothing more in practise than to exercise their voice, and not
even that skilfully--and try their strength of lungs and volubility
of tongue.  Such practise is but a waste of breath.  The student
should make it a cardinal rule always to do his best even while
practising in his room; to speak on subjects that he has deliberately
considered, and in such a style as he would adopt were an audience
before him.  Of course, that kind of speaking will be most
advantageous to the advocate which is most in accordance with the
business of his life.  Prominent advocates in every age have, while
developing their powers, made it a practise to propose a case similar
to those brought in the courts, and to make arguments thereon as
nearly as possible as they would were it an actual case in court.
Cicero followed this plan two thousand years ago, as he himself has
told us, and Curran and Choate were both indefatigable in this
practise.

Such are the means, such the labors by which the student may make
himself an advocate.  It is not the work of an hour or a day or a
year, but of years--years of application and of industry--of patient
plodding and painful study.  It is not by starts of application and
intermittent labor that anything valuable can be achieved.  It is the
outgrowth of well-directed and persistent effort.  In nothing more
than oratory are the lines of the poet true:

  "The Father of our race Himself decrees
  That culture shall be hard."


It has been the glory of the great masters of the art to confront and
to overcome; and all the wisdom of these latter days has discovered
no other road to success.  These suggestions apply not only to the
lawyer, but to every man who would become an efficient public speaker
and a leader of men.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "IMPROMPTU" ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
